# Calculating HWE and finding outliers of given population
Nan Hu / Jan 24, 2020

---
## Aims
1. Starting to work on HPCC
2. Building up software environment
3. Getting familiar to VCF file format
4. Using vcftools and/or angsd to calculate HWE
5. Result display and interpretation 
---

## Environment preparation
Before starting working on course project. We need to get familiar with working with super computer clusters and Linux environment. TTU has provided HPCC (High Performance Computer Center) services. In order to get access to HPCC resources, we need to [apply](https://www.depts.ttu.edu/hpcc/accounts/studentrequest.php) for an account for research use. 

Software for this class mostly run under Linux operating system, which is the OS of HPC. On the website of HPCC, you could find some tutorials of using HPC and basics of Linux. They also offers regular [training](https://www.depts.ttu.edu/hpcc/about/training.php) on these topics. There are previous training records to help you quickly get into  bioinformatics fields.

When you are ready to use Linux for this course, this practice requires installation of software environment called [conda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html). This is an open-source package management software helps installing other analytical tools and prepare required environment. It is simple to use Conda to install packages by just typing: ```conda install <package name>```. For more simple usages, you can visit [conda cheat sheet](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/cheatsheet.html).

Now, we can start using conda to install one useful software called [vcftools](http://vcftools.sourceforge.net/). Type below command to prompt:
```bash
conda install vcftools
```
We should see the software searching for packages. When system asks you if you want to install packages, type 'y' and hit enter. Then, we just wait it automatically finishing installation.

When finished isntallation, try to call help document to test if the software works. Sometimes, you need to relogin to remote computers to let some source files reloaded.
```bash
vcftools --help
```
If this command gives you correct information, it means you successfully created software environment for this practice.

Another software which is quite often used in population genetics is called 'angsd'. It is not available to install through conda yet (I am not sure. If I am wrong please tell me). The installation notes are [here](https://github.com/ANGSD/angsd/blob/master/README.md).

## Calculating HWE and do Fisher's Exact Test
The datasets we use for calculating HWE are from three species: *Salix phlebophylla*, *Salix nivalis*, and *Salix reticulata*. We prepared the data through initial read alignment, genotyping and hard filtering. So far, these data are prepared for this practice but might not be approporate for later analysis. There would be more filtering processes applied to these data in the future.

Current data file for three species are stored in HPCC directory: ```/lustre/scratch/nhu/popgen2021/raw/```. (It is not there right now but I promise I will finish prepare those and get it available before midnight of Jan. 29, 2021 - Nan). You can copy them to your own working directory for easier access.

Now, create a text file and type below commands into. Then, submit it.
```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -J HWEcalc
#SBATCH -o %x.o%j
#SBATCH –e %x.e%j
#SBATCH -p nocona
#SBATCH -N 1
#SBATCH -n 128

vcftools --vcf <vcf file> --hardy --out <output file name>
```
The result of this will reports a p-value for each site from a Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium test (as defined by Wigginton, Cutler and Abecasis (2005)). It will also contain the Observed numbers of Homozygotes and Heterozygotes and the corresponding Expected numbers under HWE.

Alternatively, you can use 'angsd' to calculate the HWE, too. Submission scripts of angsd are:
```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -J HWEcalc
#SBATCH -o %x.o%j
#SBATCH –e %x.e%j
#SBATCH -p nocona
#SBATCH -N 1
#SBATCH -n 128

angsd -vcf-gl <vcf file> -doHWE 1
```
Similar results should be generated by angsd. 



